# Pre-commit hooks

This repository uses the Python package [`pre-commit`][pre-commit] to manage pre-commit hooks. Pre-commit hooks are
actions which are run automatically, typically on each commit, to perform some common set of tasks. For example, a
pre-commit hook might be used to run any code linting automatically, providing any warnings before code is committed,
ensuring that all of our code adheres to a certain quality standard.

```{contents}
:local:
:depth: 2
```

## Purpose

For this repository, we are using `pre-commit` for a number of purposes:

- Checking for secrets being committed accidentally — see [here](#definition-of-a-secret-according-to-detect-secrets)
  for the definition of a "secret";
- Checking for any large files (over 5 MB) being committed; and
- Cleaning Jupyter notebooks, which means removing all outputs, execution counts, Python kernels, and, for Google
  Colaboratory (Colab), stripping out user information.

We have configured `pre-commit` to run automatically on _every commit_. By running on each commit, we ensure that
`pre-commit` will be able to detect all contraventions and keep our repository in a healthy state.

> ⚠️ **No pre-commit hooks will be run on Google Colab notebooks pushed directly to GitHub**. For security reasons, it
> is highly recommended that you manually download your notebook, and commit up locally to ensure pre-commit hooks are
> executed on your changes

## Installation

In order for `pre-commit` to run, action is needed to configure it on your system.

- Install the `pre-commit` package into your Python environment from `requirements.txt`; and
- Run `pre-commit install` in your terminal to set up `pre-commit` to run when code is _committed_.

## Using the `detect-secrets` pre-commit hook

> ⚠️ The `detect-secrets` package does its best to prevent accidental committing of secrets, but it can't catch
> everything. **It doesn't replace good software development practices!** See the definition of a secret
> [here](#definition-of-a-secret-according-to-detect-secrets) for further information.

We use [`detect-secrets`][detect-secrets] to check that no secrets, as defined
[here](#definition-of-a-secret-according-to-detect-secrets), are accidentally committed. This hook requires you to
generate a baseline file if one is not already present within the root directory. To create the baseline file, run the
following at the root of the repository:

```shell
detect-secrets scan > .secrets.baseline
```

Next, audit the baseline that has been generated by running:

```shell
detect-secrets audit .secrets.baseline
```

When you run this command, you'll enter an interactive console and be presented with a list of high-entropy string
and/or anything which _could_ be a secret, and asked to verify whether this is the case. By doing this, the hook will
be in a position to know if you're later committing any _new_ secrets to the repository, and it will be able to alert
you accordingly.

### Definition of a "secret" according to `detect-secrets`

The [`detect-secrets` documentation][detect-secrets], as of January 2021, says it works:

> ...by running periodic diff outputs against heuristically crafted \[regular expression\] statements, to identify
> whether any new secret has been committed.

This means it uses regular expression patterns to scan your code changes for anything that **looks like a secret
according to one or more of these regular expression patterns**. By definition, there are only a limited number of
patterns, so the `detect-secrets` package cannot detect every conceivable type of secret.

To understand what types of secrets will be detected, read the [caveats][detect-secrets-caveats], and the list of
[supported plugins][detect-secrets-plugins] that the package uses. Also, you should use secret variable names that
contain words that will trip the KeywordDetector plugin; see the `DENYLIST` variable
[here][detect-secrets-keyword-detector] for the full list of words.

### If `pre-commit` detects secrets during commit

If `pre-commit` detects any secrets when you try to create a commit, it will detail what it found and where to go to
check the secret.

If the detected secret is a false positive, there are two options to resolve this, and prevent your commit from being
blocked: [inline allowlisting (recommended)](#inline-allowlisting-recommended) or
[updating `.secrets.baseline`](#updating-secretsbaseline).

In either case, if an actual secret is detected (or a combination of actual secrets and false positives), first remove
the actual secret before following either of these processes.

#### Inline allowlisting (recommended)

To exclude a false positive, add a `pragma` comment such as:

```python
secret = "Password123"  # pragma: allowlist secret
```

or

```python
#  pragma: allowlist nextline secret
secret = "Password123"
```

If the detected secret is actually a secret (or other sensitive information), remove the secret and re-commit; there is
no need to add any `pragma` comments.

If your commit contains a mixture of false positives and actual secrets, remove the actual secrets first before adding
`pragma` comments to the false positives.

#### Updating `.secrets.baseline`

To exclude a false positive, you can also update the `.secrets.baseline` through the following steps:

- Run `detect-secrets scan --baseline .secrets.baseline` from the root folder in the terminal to index the
  false positive(s);
- Next, audit all indexed secrets via `detect-secrets audit .secrets.baseline` (the same as during initial set-up, if a
  `.secrets.baseline` doesn't exist); and
- Finally, ensure that you commit the updated `.secrets.baseline` in the same commit as the false positive(s) it has
  been updated for.

If the detected secret is actually a secret (or other sensitive information), remove the secret and re-commit. There is
no need to update the `.secrets.baseline` file in this case.

If your commit contains a mixture of false positives and actual secrets, remove the actual secrets first before
updating and auditing the `.secrets.baseline` file.

## Keeping specific Jupyter notebook outputs

It may be necessary or useful to keep certain output cells of a Jupyter notebook, for example charts or graphs
visualising some set of data. To do this, according to the documentation for the [`nbstripout`][nbstripout] package,
either:

1. Add a `keep_output` tag to the desired cell; or
2. Add `"keep_output": true` to the desired cell's metadata.

You can access cell tags or metadata in Jupyter by enabling the "Tags" or "Edit Metadata" toolbar
(View > Cell Toolbar > Tags; View > Cell Toolbar > Edit Metadata). For the tags approach, enter `keep_output` in the
text field for each desired cell, and press the "Add tag" button. For the metadata approach, press the "Edit Metadata"
button on each desired cell, and edit the metadata to look like this:

```json
{
  "keep_output": true
}
```

This will tell the hook not to strip the resulting output of the desired cell(s), allowing the output(s) to be
committed.

>  ℹ️ Currently (March 2020) there is no way to add tags and/or metadata to Google Colab notebooks. It's strongly
> suggested that you download the Colab as a .ipynb file, and edit tags and/or metadata using Jupyter _before_
> committing the code if you want to keep some outputs.

[detect-secrets]: https://github.com/Yelp/detect-secrets
[detect-secrets-caveats]: https://github.com/Yelp/detect-secrets#caveats
[detect-secrets-keyword-detector]: https://github.com/Yelp/detect-secrets/blob/master/detect_secrets/plugins/keyword.py
[detect-secrets-plugins]: https://github.com/Yelp/detect-secrets#currently-supported-plugins
[nbstripout]: https://github.com/kynan/nbstripout
[pre-commit]: https://pre-commit.com/
