# govcookiecutter
A cookiecutter template for data science projects written in Python or R within UK Government.

This repository replaces the original
[`cookiecutter-data-science-gds`](https://github.com/ukgovdatascience/cookiecutter-data-science-gds), which has been archived.  Please start using this one.

## Requirements

You need to have
[cookiecutter](https://cookiecutter.readthedocs.io/en/1.7.2/installation.html#install-cookiecutter)
installed.

This project runs on Python 3.5+. To install required Python packages via `pip`, first [set up a Python virtual
environment](#creating-a-python-virtual-environment); this ensures you do not install the packages globally. Note there
are additional [requirements](./%7B%7B%20cookiecutter.repo_name%20%7D%7D/README.md#requirements) for the output.

To create a new repository structure from this cookiecutter, install the required Python packages via `pip` by running the following command in your terminal (macOS) or shell (Linux):

```shell script
make requirements
```

To make developments to this project, install the development Python packages via `pip` by running the following command in your terminal/shell:

```shell script
make requirements-dev
```

Once you have installed the packages, remember to [set up pre-commit hooks](#installing-pre-commit-hooks).

### Creating a Python virtual environment

Creating a Python virtual environment depends on whether you are using [base Python](#base-python-interpreter) or [Anaconda](#anaconda-interpreter) as your interpreter.

#### Base Python interpreter

If you are using base Python, there are multiple ways to create virtual environments in Python using `pip`, including (but not limited to):

- [`venv`](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html);
- [`virtualenv`](https://virtualenv.pypa.io/en/stable/);
- [`pipenv`](https://github.com/pypa/pipenv); and
- [`pyenv`](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv) with its `virtualenv` [plugin](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv-virtualenv).

Follow the documentation of your chosen method to create a Python virtual environment.

#### Anaconda interpreter

If you are using [Anaconda or `conda`](https://www.anaconda.com/), following their [documentation](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/tasks/manage-environments.html) to set up a conda environment.

## Creating a new project

To create a new project using this template, in the folder where you want your project to be located, run the following code in your terminal/shell:

```shell script
cookiecutter https://github.com/ukgovdatascience/govcookiecutter
```

Then following the prompts in your terminal to create the project structure.

## Installing pre-commit hooks

This repo uses the Python package [`pre-commit`](https://pre-commit.com) to manage pre-commit hooks. Pre-commit hooks are actions which are run automatically, typically on each commit, to perform some common set of tasks. For example, a pre-commit hook might be used to run any code linting automatically, providing any warnings before code is committed, ensuring that all of our code adheres to a certain quality standard.

For this repo, we are using `pre-commit` for a number of purposes:
- Checking for any secrets being committed accidentally;
- Checking for any large files (over 5MB) being committed; and
- Cleaning Jupyter notebooks, which means removing all outputs and execution counts.

We have configured `pre-commit` to run automatically on _every commit_. By running on each commit, we ensure that `pre-commit` will be able to detect all contraventions and keep our repo in a healthy state.

In order for `pre-commit` to run, action is needed to configure it on your system.
- [Install](#installing-python-packages) the `pre-commit` package into your Python environment from
`requirements-dev.txt`; and
- Run `pre-commit install` in your terminal/shell to set-up `pre-commit` to run when code is _committed_.

### Setting up a baseline for the `detect-secrets` hook (if one doesn't already exist)

The `detect-secrets` hook requires that you generate a baseline file if one is not already present within the root directory. This is done via running the following at the root of the repo in your terminal/shell/console:

```shell script
detect-secrets scan > .secrets.baseline
```

Next, audit the baseline that has been generated by running the following in your terminal/shell:

```shell script
detect-secrets audit .secrets.baseline
```

When you run this command, you'll enter an interactive console and be presented with a list of high-entropy string / anything which _could_ be a secret, and asked to verify whether or not this is the case. By doing this, the hook will be in a position to know if you're later committing any _new_ secrets to the repo and it will be able to alert you accordingly.

### If `pre-commit` detects secrets during commit:

If `pre-commit` detects any secrets when you try to create a commit, it will detail what it found and where to go to check the secret.

If the detected secret is a false-positive, you should update the secrets baseline through the following steps:

- Run `detect-secrets scan --update .secrets.baseline` in your terminal/shell/console to index the false-positive(s);
- Next, audit all indexed secrets via `detect-secrets audit .secrets.baseline` (the same as during initial set-up, if a secrets baseline doesn't exist); and
- Finally, ensure that you commit the updated secrets baseline in the same commit as the false-positive(s) it has been updated for.

If the detected secret is actually a secret (or other sensitive information), remove the secret and re-commit. There is no need to update the secrets baseline in this case.

If your commit contains a mixture of false-positives and actual secrets, remove the actual secrets first before updating and auditing the secrets baseline.

## Using this with R
Please follow all the above steps.

After that, we use [renv](https://github.com/rstudio/renv) to manage package dependencies here. Thus, before writing any code, run the following R code in your R session:

```r
# installs packages for pre-commit hooks in DESCRIPTION file
renv::install()
# installs packages for project captured in renv.lock
renv::restore()
```

This will install additional packages that are necessary to work alongside the pre-commit hooks for R code.

### Note on Jupyter notebook cleaning

It may be necessary or useful to keep certain output cells of a Jupyter notebook, for example charts or graphs visualising some set of data. To do this, add the following comment at the top of the input block:

```shell script
# [keep_output]
```

This will tell `pre-commit` not to strip the resulting output of this cell, allowing it to be committed.

## Acknowledgements

This template is based off the [DrivenData Cookiecutter Data Science](http://drivendata.github.io/cookiecutter-data-science/) project, especially around the `data` and `src` folder structures, and the `make help` command.
