# {{ cookiecutter.project_name }}

## Overview

{{ cookiecutter.overview }}

## Requirements

To run the code in this GitHub repository, please make sure your system meets the following requirements:

- Unix-like operating system (macOS, Linux, …);
- [`direnv`](https://direnv.net/) installed, including shell hooks;
- [`.envrc`](.envrc) allowed/trusted by `direnv` to use the environment variables - see
[below](#allowingtrusting-envrc);
{%- if cookiecutter.create_secrets_file == "Yes" %}
- If missing, [create a `.secrets` file](#creating-a-secrets-file) to store untracked secrets;{% endif %}
- Python 3.5 or above; and
- Python packages installed from the `requirements.txt` file.

Note there may be some Python IDE-specific requirements around loading environment variables, which are not considered
here.

### Allowing/trusting `.envrc`

To allow/trust the [`.envrc`](.envrc) run the `allow` command using `direnv` at the top level of this repository.

```shell script
direnv allow
```
{% if cookiecutter.create_secrets_file == "Yes" %}
### Creating a `.secrets` file

Secrets used by this repository can be stored in a `.secrets` file. **This is not tracked by Git**, and so secrets will
not be committed onto your remote.

In your shell terminal, at the top level of the repository, create a `.secrets` file.

```shell script
touch .secrets
```

Open this new `.secrets` file using a text editor, and add any secrets as environmental variables. For example, to add
a JSON credentials file for Google BigQuery, add the following code to `.secrets`.

```shell script
export GOOGLE_APPLICATION_CREDENTIALS="path/to/credentials.json"
```
{% endif %}
### Installing Python packages

To install required Python packages via `pip`, first [set up a Python virtual
environment](#creating-a-python-virtual-environment); this ensures you do not install the packages globally.

Then run the following `make` command at the top level of this repository:

```shell script
make requirements
```

Once you have installed the packages, remember to [set up pre-commit hooks](#installing-pre-commit-hooks).

### Creating a Python virtual environment

Creating a Python virtual environment depends on whether you are using [base Python](#base-python-interpreter) or
[Anaconda](#anaconda-interpreter) as your interpreter.

#### Base Python interpreter

If you are using base Python, there are multiple ways to create virtual environments in Python using `pip`, including
(but not limited to):

- [`venv`](https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/venv.html);
- [`virtualenv`](https://virtualenv.pypa.io/en/stable/);
- [`pipenv`](https://github.com/pypa/pipenv); and
- [`pyenv`](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv) with its `virtualenv` [plugin](https://github.com/pyenv/pyenv-virtualenv).

Follow the documentation of your chosen method to create a Python virtual environment.

#### Anaconda interpreter

If you are using [Anaconda or `conda`](https://www.anaconda.com/), following their
[documentation](https://docs.conda.io/projects/conda/en/latest/user-guide/tasks/manage-environments.html) to set up a
conda environment.

## Folder structure

An overview of the folder structure, and the top-level files can be found [here](docs/structure/README.md).

## Installing pre-commit hooks

This repo uses the Python package [`pre-commit`](https://pre-commit.com) to manage pre-commit hooks. Pre-commit hooks
are actions which are run automatically, typically on each commit, to perform some common set of tasks. For example, a
pre-commit hook might be used to run any code linting automatically, providing any warnings before code is committed,
ensuring that all of our code adheres to a certain quality standard.

For this repo, we are using `pre-commit` for a number of purposes:
- Checking for any secrets being committed accidentally;
- Checking for any large files (over 5MB) being committed; and
- Cleaning Jupyter notebooks, which means removing all outputs and execution counts.

We have configured `pre-commit` to run automatically on _every commit_. By running on each commit, we ensure
that `pre-commit` will be able to detect all contraventions and keep our repo in a healthy state.

In order for `pre-commit` to run, action is needed to configure it on your system.

- [Install](#installing-python-packages) the `pre-commit` package into your Python environment; and
- Run `pre-commit install` to set-up `pre-commit` to run when code is _committed_.

### Setting up a baseline for the `detect-secrets` hook (if one doesn't already exist)

The `detect-secrets` hook requires that you generate a baseline file if one is not already present within the root
directory. This is done via running the following at the root of the repo:

```shell script
detect-secrets scan > .secrets.baseline
```

Next, audit the baseline that has been generated by running:

```shell script
detect-secrets audit .secrets.baseline
```

When you run this command, you'll enter an interactive console and be presented with a list of high-entropy string /
anything which _could_ be a secret, and asked to verify whether or not this is the case. By doing this, the hook will
be in a position to know if you're later committing any _new_ secrets to the repo and it will be able to alert you
accordingly.

### If `pre-commit` detects secrets during commit:

If `pre-commit` detects any secrets when you try to create a commit, it will detail what it found and where to go to
check the secret.

If the detected secret is a false-positive, you should update the secrets baseline through the following steps:

- Run `detect-secrets scan --update .secrets.baseline` to index the false-positive(s);
- Next, audit all indexed secrets via `detect-secrets audit .secrets.baseline` (the same as during initial set-up, if a
secrets baseline doesn't exist); and
- Finally, ensure that you commit the updated secrets baseline in the same commit as the false-positive(s) it has been
updated for.

If the detected secret is actually a secret (or other sensitive information), remove the secret and re-commit. There is
no need to update the secrets baseline in this case.

If your commit contains a mixture of false-positives and actual secrets, remove the actual secrets first before
updating and auditing the secrets baseline.
{% if cookiecutter.add_r_precommit_hooks == "Yes" %}
## Using this with R
Please follow all the above steps.

After that, we use [renv](https://github.com/rstudio/renv) to manage package dependencies here. Thus, before writing any code, run the following R code in your R session:

```r
# installs packages for pre-commit hooks in DESCRIPTION file
renv::install()
# installs packages for project captured in renv.lock
renv::restore()
```

This will install additional packages that are necessary to work alongside the pre-commit hooks for R code.
{% endif -%}
### Note on Jupyter notebook cleaning

It may be necessary or useful to keep certain output cells of a Jupyter notebook, for example charts or graphs
visualising some set of data. To do this, add the following comment at the top of the input block:

```shell script
# [keep_output]
```

This will tell `pre-commit` not to strip the resulting output of this cell, allowing it to be committed.
